📖 Add CRD Upgrade Safety documentation (#1090)
operator-framework/operator-controller: docs/refs/crd-upgrade-safety.md

in order to maintain backwards compatibility with previous versions of that CRD.
These validation checks are known collectively as the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check.

The CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check consists of several individual field validations
that are performed before an upgrade to a CRD is allowed to progress on a cluster.

## Disallowed CRD Upgrade Changes

The following changes to an existing CRD will be caught by the CRD Upgrade
Safety preflight check and prevent the upgrade:
- The scope changes from Cluster to Namespace or from Namespace to Cluster
- An existing stored version of the CRD is removed
- A new required field is added to an existing version of the CRD
- An existing field is removed from an existing version of the CRD
- An existing field type is changed in an existing version of the CRD
- A new default value is added to a field that did not previously have a default value
- The default value of a field is changed
- An existing default value of a field is removed
- New enum restrictions are added to an existing field which did not previously have enum restrictions
- Existing enum values from an existing field are removed

> - The minimum value of an existing field is incrased in an existing version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The minimum value of an existing field is increased in an existing version
```

- The maximum value of an existing field is decreased in an existing version
- Minimum or maximum field constraints are added to a field that did not previously have constraints

If the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check encounters one of the disallowed upgrade changes,
it will log an error for each disallowed change detected in the CRD upgrade.

In cases where a change to the CRD does not fall into one of the disallowed change categories
but is also unable to be properly detected as allowed, the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check

> will prevent the upgrade and log an error for an "unknown change."

Reviewer: Should we include a statement along the lines of "If you identify any checks that we do not currently have coverage for and would like explicit coverage for, please create an issue"?

**Note:** the rules for changes to minimum and maximum values apply to `minimum`, `minLength`,

> `minProperties`, `minItems`, `maximum`, `maxLength`, `maxProperties`, and `maxItems` constrants.

Reviewer: What do you think about moving this to being immediately after the list of validations?

## Allowed CRD Upgrade Changes

The following changes to an existing CRD are safe for backwards compatibility and will
not cause the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check to halt the upgrade:

> - Adding new enum values to the list of allowed enum values in a field

Reviewer: I think it is fine to leave in for now because it is not considered a breaking change in our validations, but something we identified is that Kubernetes API conventions state that adding new enum values is actually considered a breaking change.

- An existing required field is changed to optional in an existing version
- The minimum value of an existing field is decreased in an existing version
- The maximum value of an existing field is increased in an existing version

> - A new version of the CRD is added with no modifications to existing versions

Reviewer: No change needed in this PR, but something that I think we may have overlooked when originally developing the preflight checks is that new versions of the CRD must be backwards compatible with the served versions _OR_ provide conversion logic to prevent data loss and invalidation of resources stored at an older version.

@joelanford I think we may need to revisit the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight checks to ensure we capture behavior to check for breaking changes between all stored and served versions of the CRD when there is no conversion strategy specified.

Author: given the long discussion this birthed in Slack, do we want to hold off on these docs until that work is done or would we just update this once that's complete? Not sure on what kind of timeline you were imagining all this.

Reviewer: We can let the doc through and update it as necessary

apiVersion: apiextensions.k8s.io/v1
kind: CustomResourceDefinition
metadata:
  annotations:
    controller-gen.kubebuilder.io/version: v0.13.0
  name: example.test.example.com
spec:
  group: test.example.com
  names:
    kind: Sample
    listKind: SampleList
    plural: samples
    singular: sample
  scope: Namespaced
  versions:
  - name: v1alpha1
    schema:
      openAPIV3Schema:
        properties:
          apiVersion:
            type: string
          kind:
            type: string
          metadata:
            type: object
          spec:
            type: object
          status:
            type: object
          pollInterval:
            type: string
        type: object
    served: true
    storage: true
    subresources:
      status: {}
```

The following examples will demonstrate specific changes to sections of the example CRD
that would be caught by the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check.

### Changing Scope

In this example, `scope` has been changed from `Namespaced` to `Cluster`.
```yaml
spec:
  group: test.example.com
  names:
    kind: Sample
    listKind: SampleList
    plural: samples
    singular: sample
  scope: Cluster
  versions:
  - name: v1alpha1
```

> 

Reviewer: Should we include what the error message looks like when a change like this is caught?

Reviewer 2: +1

Reviewer 2: I like putting example outputs in [collapsible blocks](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/blob/main/docs/Tasks/explore-available-packages.md?plain=1#L25).

* https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/admonitions/#collapsible-blocks

The CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check consists of several individual field validations
that are performed before an upgrade to a CRD is allowed to progress on a cluster.

## Disallowed CRD Upgrade Changes

The following changes to an existing CRD will be caught by the CRD Upgrade
Safety preflight check and prevent the upgrade:
- The scope changes from Cluster to Namespace or from Namespace to Cluster
- An existing stored version of the CRD is removed
- A new required field is added to an existing version of the CRD
- An existing field is removed from an existing version of the CRD
- An existing field type is changed in an existing version of the CRD
- A new default value is added to a field that did not previously have a default value
- The default value of a field is changed
- An existing default value of a field is removed
- New enum restrictions are added to an existing field which did not previously have enum restrictions
- Existing enum values from an existing field are removed
- The minimum value of an existing field is increased in an existing version
- The maximum value of an existing field is decreased in an existing version

> - Minimum or maximum field constraints are added to a field that did not previously have constraints

Author: That could be nice. I spent a few minutes trying to think of how exactly that would be structured and couldn't really come up with a good idea. Maybe columns for safe/unsafe changes or something?

> - Minimum or maximum field constraints are added to a field that did not previously have constraints

Reviewer 2: I have played around with it too, but I haven't been able to beat your list. I also haven't been able to figure out a good information architecture.

I do feel like like it would be nice to have this be a bit more scan-able as a reference. Maybe we will come up with something when we downstream this doc?

> **Note:** the rules for changes to minimum and maximum values apply to `minimum`, `minLength`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
!!! note 
The rules for changes to minimum and maximum values apply to `minimum`, `minLength`,
```
See https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/admonitions/#usage

`minProperties`, `minItems`, `maximum`, `maxLength`, `maxProperties`, and `maxItems` constrants.

If the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check encounters one of the disallowed upgrade changes,
it will log an error for each disallowed change detected in the CRD upgrade.

In cases where a change to the CRD does not fall into one of the disallowed change categories
but is also unable to be properly detected as allowed, the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check
will prevent the upgrade and log an error for an "unknown change."

> If you identify any preflight checks that should be implemented to prevent issues during CRD upgrades, please [create a new issue](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/issues).

Reviewer 2: Would we want to highlight this as an admonition to draw attention to it? Maybe as a tip?
https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/admonitions/#supported-types

## Allowed CRD Upgrade Changes

The following changes to an existing CRD are safe for backwards compatibility and will
not cause the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check to halt the upgrade:
- Adding new enum values to the list of allowed enum values in a field
- An existing required field is changed to optional in an existing version
- The minimum value of an existing field is decreased in an existing version
- The maximum value of an existing field is increased in an existing version
- A new version of the CRD is added with no modifications to existing versions

## Disabling CRD Upgrade Safety

The CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check can be entirely disabled by adding the
`preflight.crdUpgradeSafety.disabled` field with a value of "true" to the ClusterExtension of the CRD.

```yaml
apiVersion: olm.operatorframework.io/v1alpha1
kind: ClusterExtension
metadata:
    name: clusterextension-sample
spec:
    installNamespace: default
    packageName: argocd-operator
    version: 0.6.0
    preflight:
        crdUpgradeSafety:
            disabled: true
```

> Only the entire CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check can be disabled, not individual field validators.

Reviewer 2: I might flip this around so that it is a little more direct:
```suggestion
You cannot individual field validators. If you disable the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check, all the field validators are disabled.
```
Or something like that.

> **Note**: Disabling the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check could break backwards compatibility with previous

Reviewer 2: I think this admonition is more of a `warning`. WDYT?

# Custom Resource Definition Upgrade Safety

When you update a Custom Resource Definition (CRD), OLM runs a CRD Upgrade Safety preflight
check to ensure backwards compatibility with previous versions of that CRD. The CRD update
must pass the validation checks before the change is allowed to progress on a cluster.

## Prohibited CRD Upgrade Changes

The following changes to an existing CRD will be caught by the CRD Upgrade
Safety preflight check and prevent the upgrade:
- The scope changes from Cluster to Namespace or from Namespace to Cluster

> - An existing stored version of the CRD is removed

Reviewer 2: I think you might need a line break between the lead-in sentence and the unordered list:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ab8c5ab5-b147-485e-80f9-7c66f1541f72)

- Minimum or maximum field constraints are added to a field that did not previously have constraints

!!! note
    The rules for changes to minimum and maximum values apply to `minimum`, `minLength`,
    `minProperties`, `minItems`, `maximum`, `maxLength`, `maxProperties`, and `maxItems` constrants.

If the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check encounters one of the disallowed upgrade changes,
it will log an error for each disallowed change detected in the CRD upgrade.

!!! tip
    In cases where a change to the CRD does not fall into one of the disallowed change categories
    but is also unable to be properly detected as allowed, the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check
    will prevent the upgrade and log an error for an "unknown change."

If you identify any preflight checks that should be implemented to prevent issues during CRD upgrades, please [create a new issue](https://github.com/operator-framework/operator-controller/issues).

## Allowed CRD Upgrade Changes

The following changes to an existing CRD are safe for backwards compatibility and will
not cause the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check to halt the upgrade:

> - Adding new enum values to the list of allowed enum values in a field

Reviewer 2: This list also needs an extra line break between the lead-in sentence and the list to fix the rendering in the preview:
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/1985d877-b43a-4e28-9a5e-25ad3fc6a4d7)

## Prohibited CRD Upgrade Changes

The following changes to an existing CRD will be caught by the CRD Upgrade
Safety preflight check and prevent the upgrade:

- The scope changes from Cluster to Namespace or from Namespace to Cluster
- An existing stored version of the CRD is removed
- A new required field is added to an existing version of the CRD
- An existing field is removed from an existing version of the CRD
- An existing field type is changed in an existing version of the CRD
- A new default value is added to a field that did not previously have a default value
- The default value of a field is changed
- An existing default value of a field is removed
- New enum restrictions are added to an existing field which did not previously have enum restrictions
- Existing enum values from an existing field are removed
- The minimum value of an existing field is increased in an existing version
- The maximum value of an existing field is decreased in an existing version
- Minimum or maximum field constraints are added to a field that did not previously have constraints

!!! note
    The rules for changes to minimum and maximum values apply to `minimum`, `minLength`,

>     `minProperties`, `minItems`, `maximum`, `maxLength`, `maxProperties`, and `maxItems` constrants.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    `minProperties`, `minItems`, `maximum`, `maxLength`, `maxProperties`, and `maxItems` constraints.
```

  name: example.test.example.com
spec:
  group: test.example.com
  names:
    kind: Sample
    listKind: SampleList
    plural: samples
    singular: sample
  scope: Namespaced
  versions:
  - name: v1alpha1
    schema:
      openAPIV3Schema:
        properties:
          apiVersion:
            type: string
          kind:
            type: string
          metadata:
            type: object
          spec:
            type: object
          status:
            type: object
          pollInterval:
            type: string
        type: object
    served: true
    storage: true
    subresources:
      status: {}
```

The following examples will demonstrate specific changes to sections of the example CRD
that would be caught by the CRD Upgrade Safety preflight check.

### Changing Scope

In this example, `scope` has been changed from `Namespaced` to `Cluster`.

??? example
    ```yaml
    spec:
      group: test.example.com
      names:
        kind: Sample
        listKind: SampleList
        plural: samples
        singular: sample
      scope: Cluster
      versions:
      - name: v1alpha1
    ```

??? failure "Error output"
    ```

>     validating upgrade for CRD "test.example.com" failed: CustomResourceDefinition test.example.com failed upgrade safety validation. "NoScopeChange" validation failed: scope changed from "Namespaced" to "Cluster"

Reviewer 2: I agree that the long line is a little hard to read, but I have always been told to keep example outputs as they are printed in the terminal.

    ```

> ### Removing a previous version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Removing a stored version
```

> In this example, the only previous version, `v1alpha1`, has been replaced with the new version:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the stored version `v1alpha1`, has been removed before it is no longer a stored version:
```

Author: The second clause of your suggestion is a little confusing to me. Is the distinction here that it's okay to remove a stored version if it's not in use? And not okay to move if it's being used? In which case would something like "has been removed while still in use?"

Author: Or maybe just simply "has been removed?"
